---
layout: post
title: A prototype JP2 validator and properties extractor
tags: [jpeg-2000,JP2,jpylyzer,GW-BASIC]
comment_id: 63
---

A few months ago I wrote a [blog
post]({{ BASE_PATH }}/2011/09/01/simple-jp2-file-structure-checker)
on a simple JP2 file structure checker. This led to some interesting
online discussions on JP2 validation. Some people asked me about the
feasibility of expanding the tool to a full-fledged JP2 validator.
Despite some initial reservations, I eventually decided to dedicate a
couple of weeks to writing a rough prototype. The first results of this
work are now ready in the form of the *jpylyzer* tool. Although I
initially intended to limit its functionality to validation (i.e.
verification against the format specifications), I quickly realised that
since validation would require the tool to extract and verify all header
properties anyway, it would make little sense not to include this
information in its output. As a result, *jpylyzer* is both a validator
and a properties extractor.

<!-- more -->

## Validation in a nutshell

It is beyond the scope of this blog post to provide an in-depth
description of how *jpylyzer* validates a JP2 file. This will all be
covered in detail by a comprehensive user manual, which I will try to
write over the following weeks. For now I will restrict myself to a very
brief overview. First of all, it is helpful here to know that internally
a JP2 file is made up of a number of building blocks that are called
'boxes'. This is illustrated by the figure below:

![JP2 Boxes diagram]({{ BASE_PATH }}/images/2011/12/jp2Boxes.png)

Some of these boxes are required (indicated by solid lines in the
figure), whereas others (depicted with dashed lines) are optional. Some
boxes are 'superboxes' that contain other boxes. A number of boxes can
have multiple instances, whereas others are always unique. In addition,
the order in which the boxes may appear in a JP2 file is subject to
certain restrictions. This is all defined by the
[standard](http://www.jpeg.org/public/15444-1annexi.pdf). At the highest
level, *jpylyzer* parses the box structure of a file and checks whether
it follows the standard. At a lower level, the information that is
contained within the boxes is often subject to restrictions as well. For
instance, the header field that defines how the colour space of an image
is specified only has two legal values; any other value is meaningless
and would therefore invalidate the file. Finally, there are a number of
interdependencies between property values. For instance, if the value of
the 'Bits Per Component' field of an image equals 255, this implies that
the JP2 Header box contains a 'Bits Per Component' box. There are
numerous other examples; the important thing here is that I have tried
to make *jpylyzer* as exhaustive as possible in this regard.

It is also worth pointing out that *jpylyzer* checks whether any
embedded ICC profiles are actually allowed, as JP2 has a number of
restrictions in this regard. There is a slight (intentional) deviation
from the standard here, as an
[amendment](http://jpeg2000wellcomelibrary.blogspot.com/2011/04/guest-post-color-in-jp2.html)
to the standard is currently in preparation that will allow the use of
"display device" profiles in JP2. The current version of *jpylyzer* is
already anticipating this change, and will consider JP2s that contain
such ICC profiles valid (provided that they do not contain any other
errors of course).

## What's not included yet

As this is a first prototype, *jpylyzer* is still a work in progress.
Although most aspects of the JP2 file format are covered, a few things
are still missing at this stage:

-   Support of the Palette and Component Mapping boxes (which are
    optional sub-boxes in the JP2 Header Box) is not included yet. The
    current version of *jpylyzer* recognises these boxes, but doesn't
    perform any analyses on them. This will change in upcoming versions.
-   The IPR, XML, UUID and UUID Info boxes are not yet supported either.
-   The analysis and validation of the image codestream is still
    somewhat limited. Currently *jpylyzer* reads and validates the
    required parts of the main codestream header (for those who are in
    the know on this: the SIZ, COD and QCD markers). It also checks if
    the information in the codestream header is consistent with the JP2
    image header (the information in both headers is partially
    redundant). Finally, it loops through all tile parts in an image,
    and checks if the length (in bytes) of each tile-part is consistent
    with the markers that delineate the start and end of each tile-part
    in the codestream. This is particularly useful for detecting certain
    types of image corruption where one or more bytes are missing from
    the codestream (either at the end or in the middle).
-   For now only codestream comments that consist solely of ASCII
    characters are reported. As the standard permits the use of
    non-ASCII characters of the Latin (ISO/IEC 8859-15) character set,
    this means that codestream comments that contain e.g. accent
    characters are currently not reported by *jpylyzer*. This will
    change in upcoming versions.

## Downloads

You can download the source code of *jpylyzer* from the following
location[^1]:

<https://github.com/bitsgalore/jpylyzer/>

This requires [Python
2.7](http://www.python.org/download/releases/2.7.2/), or [Python
3.2](http://www.python.org/getit/releases/3.2/) or more recent. A word
of warning though: due to a number of reasons the source code ended up
somewhat clumsy and unnecessarily verbose (one colleague even remarked
that looking at it induced nostalgic memories of good old GW-BASIC!).
With some major refactoring the overall length of the code could
probably be reduced to half its current size, and I may have a go at
this at some later point. For now it'll have to do as it is!

I also created some Windows binaries for those who do not want to
install Python. Just follow the link below, download the ZIP file and
extract it to an empty directory. Then simply use 'jpylyzer.exe'
directly on the command line:

<https://github.com/bitsgalore/jpylyzer/downloads>

## A final word

Keep in mind that the current version of *jpylyzer* is still a
prototype. There may (and probably will) be unresolved bugs, and it
really shouldn't be used in any operational workflows at this stage. So
far I have tested it with a range of JPEG 2000 images (mostly JP2, but
also some JPX), including some images that I deliberately corrupted. No
matter how corrupt an image is, this should never cause *jpylyzer* to
crash. Therefore, it would be extremely useful if people could test the
tool on their worst and weirdest images, and report back in case of any
unexpected results. For early 2012 I'm also planning to write a
comprehensive user guide that gives some more details on the validation
process, as well as an explanation on the reported properties. Support
of the JP2 boxes that are currently missing will also follow around that
time. Meanwhile, any feedback on the current prototype is highly
appreciated!

[^1]: Postscript, February 2019 - all links in this section point to an insanely outdated version of *jpylyzer*! Don't use them, but go to the *jpylyzer* web site at <http://jpylyzer.openpreservation.org/> instead (unless you're some future software historian with an unlikely interest in the history of *jpylyzer*).

<hr>
Originally published at the [Open Preservation Foundation blog](https://openpreservation.org/blog/2011/12/14/prototype-jp2-validator-and-properties-extractor/)
