---
layout: post
title: Recovering '90s Data Tapes - Experiences From the KB Web Archaeology project
tags: [tapes, tapeimgr, web-archaeology]
---

Earlier this year I published [this blog post]({{ BASE_PATH }}/2019/01/31/roll-the-tape-recovering-90s-data-tapes-in-bitcurator) on the recovery of data from '90s data tapes. I gave a presentation on this during [this year's *iPress* conference](https://ipres2019.org/) conference, and wrote a paper that discusses this work in more detail than my earlier blog post. The original paper (in PDF format) can be found in the [conference proceedings](add-link-here). The paper references a wealth of useful resources, but these are not easily accessible because the [*LaTeX*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LaTeX) software that I used to typeset the paper has a tendency to break URLs in a variety of ways. So, below is a more web-friendly version of the paper that fixes this issue.

<figure class="image">
  <img src="{{ BASE_PATH }}/images/2019/09/tapes-dds-dlt.jpg" alt="DDS-1 (left) and DLT-IV (right) tape">
</figure>

<!-- more -->

Abstract {#abstract}
============

The recovery of digital data from tape formats from the mid
to late ’90s is not well covered by existing digital preservation and
forensics literature. This paper addresses this knowledge gap with a
discussion of the hardware and software that can be used to read such
tapes. It introduces *tapeimgr*, a user-friendly software application
that allows one to read tapes in a format-agnostic manner. It also
presents workflows that integrate the discussed hardware and software
components. It then shows how these workflows were used to recover the
contents of a set of DDS-1, DDS-3 and DLT-IV tapes from the mid to late
’90s. These tapes contain the source data of a number of “lost” web
sites that the National Library of the Netherlands (KB) is planning to
reconstruct at a later stage as part of its ongoing Web Archaeology
project. The paper also presents some first results of sites from 1995
that have already been reconstructed from these tapes.

**Keywords** – tapes, digital forensics, web archaeology

**Conference Topics** – The Cutting Edge: Technical Infrastructure and
Implementation

Introduction {#introduction}
============

When the National Library of the Netherlands (hereafter: KB) launched
its web archive in 2007, many sites from the “early” Dutch web had
already gone offline. As a result, the time period between (roughly)
1992 and 2000 is under-represented in the web archive. To improve the
coverage of web sites from this historically important era, the KB has
started to investigate the use of tools and methods from the emerging
field of “web archaeology” [\[1\]](https://doi.org/10.1177/0955749017725930).
Analogous to how archaeologists study past
cultures from excavated physical artefacts, web archaeology is about
reconstructing “lost” web sites using data that are recovered from old
(and often obsolete) physical carriers. It is worth noting that Ross and
Gow introduced the concept of “digital archaeology” (of which web
archaeology is a special case) as early as 1999 [\[2\]](http://www.ukoln.ac.uk/services/elib/papers/supporting/pdf/p2.pdf).

Over the last year, the KB web archiving team has reached out to a
number of creators of “early” Dutch web sites that are no longer online.
Many of these creators still possess offline information carriers with
the original source data of their sites. This would potentially allow us
to reconstruct those sites, and then ingest them into the web archive.
The overall approach would be similar to how we already reconstructed
the first Dutch web index *NL-Menu* in 2018 [\[3\]](https://www.bitsgalore.org/2018/04/24/resurrecting-the-first-dutch-web-index-nl-menu-revisited),
[\[4\]](https://www.bitsgalore.org/2018/07/11/crawling-offline-web-content-the-nl-menu-case).

A few of these creators have already provided us with sample sets of
carriers which, though limited in size, comprise a range of physical
formats, such as CD-ROMs, floppy disks, ZIP disks, USB thumb drives, and
(internal) hard disks. One sample set was provided to us by the former
owners of *xxLINK*, a web development and hosting company that was
founded in 1994. It was the first Dutch company that provided these
services, and throughout the ’90s *xxLINK* created web sites for a large
number of well-known Dutch companies and institutions[^1]. A
particularly interesting feature of the *xxLINK* sample set is that it
includes 33 data tapes.

There is a relative wealth of digital preservation and digital forensics
literature on the recovery of data from physical carriers. Examples
include Ross and Gow [\[2\]](http://www.ukoln.ac.uk/services/elib/papers/supporting/pdf/p2.pdf),
Elford et al. [\[5\]](http://archive.ifla.org/IV/ifla74/papers/084-Webb-en.pdf),
Woods and Brown [\[6\]](https://kamwoods.net/publications/woodsbrownarch09.pdf),
Woods et al. [\[7\]](http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1998076.1998088),
Lee et al. [\[8\]](http://www.dlib.org/dlib/may12/lee/05lee.html),
John [\[9\]](http://dx.doi.org/10.7207/twr12-03)
and Pennock et al. [\[10\]](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1321629).
For many carrier types published workflow descriptions are readily available
(see e.g. Prael and Wickner [\[11\]](https://practicaltechnologyforarchives.org/issue4_prael_wickner/),
Salo [\[12\]](https://radd.dsalo.info/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/BuildDocumentation.pdf)
and the workflows published by the *BitCurator Consortium* [\[13\]](https://bitcuratorconsortium.org/workflows),
to name but a few). Even though these cover a wide range of physical
carrier types, the existing literature provides surprisingly little
information on how to recover data from legacy tape formats. One of the
few exceptions are De Haan [\[14\]](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1255965)
and De Haan et al. [\[15\]](https://hart.amsterdam/image/2017/11/17/20171116_freeze_diy_handboek.pdf),
who describe how they rescued 11 GB worth of data from three DLT tapes.
However, they do not provide much detail about the hardware and software setup
they used for this.

Reading these legacy tape formats presents a number of challenges.
First, it requires specific hardware that is now largely obsolete. This
includes not only the actual tape readers, but also host adapters that
are needed to connect a tape reader to a modern forensic workstation,
cables and adapter plugs. Because of this, finding the “right” hardware
setup is often not straightforward. Furthermore, since the original
software that was used to write (and read) legacy data tapes may not be
available anymore (if it is known at all), the tapes should be read in a
format-agnostic way at the block device level. This can be done with
existing software tools, but these tools are not very user-friendly, and
the resulting workflows can be quite unwieldy. Also, the logical
interpretation of data files that have been recovered from tape requires
some additional work. Finally, even though there are still various
online resources that cover reading these tapes[^2], the information
they provide is often fragmentary, or geared towards specific backup
software or hardware. This is especially true for older resources that
date back to the time when these tape formats were in heavy use.

Hence, there appears to be a knowledge gap. The overall aim of this
paper is to fill this gap by discussing the hardware and software that
can be used to read such tapes, and by presenting practical workflows
that allowed us to recover the information from the *xxLINK* tapes.
These workflows are largely based on current hard- and software. They
are also fully open source, and can be easily integrated into
Linux-based platforms, including the popular *BitCurator*[^3]
environment.

Outline {#outline}
=======

This paper starts with a brief overview of the tape formats in the
*xxLINK* sample set. This is followed by a discussion of the hardware
that is needed for accessing tapes like these. This section also
provides some suggestions that will hopefully be useful to others who
are starting similar tape-related work. It then suggests a
format-agnostic procedure for reading the data on the tapes, and
presents a new software application that was developed specifically for
reading tapes in a simple and user-friendly manner. Next follows a
discussion of how this hardware and software setup were integrated into
workflows, and how these workflows were used to recover the data on the
*xxLINK* tapes. This is followed by two sections that explain the
further processing of the recovered data: the extraction of the
resulting container files, and the subsequent reconstruction of any
“lost” web sites whose underlying data are enclosed in them. This
section also shows some first results of sites that were recovered from
a 1995 tape. The closing section summarizes the main conclusions.

Tape formats {#tape-formats}
============

The majority (19) of the tapes in the *xxLINK* sample set are DDS tapes,
most of which were written in 1995. DDS (Digital Data Storage) is a
family of tape formats that are based on Digital Audio Tape (DAT). Using
the product codes I was able to identify the majority of these DDS tapes
as DDS-1, which was the first generation of DDS. DDS-1 was introduced in
1989, and has a maximum capacity of 2 GB (uncompressed), or 4 GB
(compressed). Two tapes could be identified as DDS-3, a format which was
introduced in 1996 with a maximum capacity of 12 GB (uncompressed), or
24 GB (compressed). A total of 7 DDS generations have been released, the
final one being DAT-320 in 2009[^4]. Backward read compatibility of DDS
drives is typically limited to 2 or 3 generations[^5]. The *xxLINK* set
also contains 14 DLT-IV tapes which were mostly written in 1999. DLT-IV
is a member of the Digital Linear Tape (DLT) family of tape formats,
which dates back to 1984. DLT-IV was first introduced in 1994[^6], and
has a capacity of up to 40 GB (uncompressed), or 80 GB (compressed)[^7].
Figure 1 shows what these tapes look like.

<figure class="image">
  <img src="{{ BASE_PATH }}/images/2019/09/tapes-dds-dlt.jpg" alt="DDS-1 (left) and DLT-IV (right) tape">
  <figcaption>Figure 1: DDS-1 (left) and DLT-IV (right) tape</figcaption>
</figure>

Hardware {#hardware}
========

For all data recovery workflows that are part of the web archaeology
project I set up a dedicated forensic workstation that is running the
*BitCurator* environment. Reading the vintage tape formats in the
*xxLINK* sample set requires some specific additional hardware, most of
which can be bought used online at a low to moderate cost. Luckily, it
turned out our IT department was still in the possession of an old
(DDS-1-compatible) DDS-2 drive, as well as a DLT-IV drive. Both drives
are shown in Figure 2.

<figure class="image">
  <img src="{{ BASE_PATH }}/images/2019/09//tapedrives-dds-dlt.jpg" alt="DLT-IV (bottom) and DDS-2 (top) tape drives">
  <figcaption>Figure 2: DLT-IV (bottom) and DDS-2 (top) tape drives</figcaption>
</figure>

In order to read the DDS-3 tapes, I purchased an additional used DAT-72
drive that has backward-compatibility with DDS-3.

SCSI host adapter {#scsi-host-adapter}
-----------------

As all three tape drives have parallel SCSI[^8] connectors, I needed a
SCSI host adapter (“SCSI card”) to connect them to the forensic
workstation. Used SCSI cards can be easily found online, and they are
usually sold cheaply. Nevertheless, finding a model that was compatible
with both our workstation and the tape drives turned out to be somewhat
complicated. This is due to a number of reasons.

First, SCSI cards often have interfaces that are not compatible with
current hardware. Many older models have a conventional PCI
interface[^9], but PCI has been largely replaced by PCI Express[^10] on
modern motherboards and desktop machines. Some cards have a 64-bit PCI
interface, which is only compatible with enterprise servers.

Even if the interface is compatible, the physical dimensions of the card
can cause further complications. Older “full-height” PCI Express cards
will not fit into a “low-profile” (also known as “half-height”) slot,
and vice versa (most modern machines only support “low-profile” cards).
Many cards were originally sold with both a “full-height” and a
“low-profile” bracket, which allows one to easily change the bracket to
fit the target machine. Buying second-hand, it is not uncommon to find
that either of the original brackets are missing.

Online sellers do not always explicitly mention characteristics like
these, and even if they do this information is not necessarily accurate.
A useful resource in this regard is the web site of the Microsemi
company, which has the technical specifications of the full range of
Adaptec SCSI adapters[^11]. Figure 3 shows the PCI Express host adapter
that we are using in our workstation.

<figure class="image">
  <img src="{{ BASE_PATH }}/images/2019/09/scsi-controller.jpg" alt="PCI Express SCSI host adapter">
  <figcaption>Figure 3: PCI Express SCSI host adapter</figcaption>
</figure>

SCSI connectors and terminators {#scsi-connectors-and-terminators}
-------------------------------

Rather than being one well-defined standard, parallel SCSI is actually a
family of related standards that comprise a host of different
interfaces, not all of which are mutually compatible[^12], [^13]. None
of these standards specify what connectors should be used to
interconnect SCSI devices. Over time, this has resulted in a myriad of
connector types that have been developed by different
manufacturers[^14]. These are typically identified by multiple names. As
an example, the commonly used 68-pin “DB68” connector is also referred
to as “MD68”, “High-Density”, “HD 68”, “Half-Pitch” and “HP68”, whereas
the “50-contact, Centronics-type” connector is alternatively known as a
“SCSI-1” or “Alternative 2, A-cable connector”. This complicates both
identifying the connector type on a particular device, as well as
finding suitable adapter plugs and cables. For identifying a connector,
the web site of Paralan provides a useful illustrated overview of the
most common types[^15].

If the tape reader is the last device at either end of the SCSI chain,
it must be fitted with a “terminator”[^16], which is a resistor circuit
that prevents the electrical signal from reflecting back from the ends
of the bus. Without a terminator, the tape drive will not work properly,
or, more likely, it will not work at all. External SCSI devices like our
tape drives use terminator plugs, as shown in Figure 4. For
internal devices, termination is often achieved through jumper settings,
or by physically removing the terminating resistors from their
sockets[^17].

<figure class="image">
  <img src="{{ BASE_PATH }}/images/2019/09/terminator.jpg" alt="SCSI terminator attached to DLT-IV drive">
  <figcaption>Figure 4: SCSI terminator attached to DLT-IV drive</figcaption>
</figure>

Cleaning cartridges {#cleaning-cartridges}
-------------------

Over time, the heads of a tape drive will get dirty due to a gradual
accumulation of dust, and sometimes also residue from the tapes that are
used. As this ultimately results in read errors, it is important to
periodically clean the drive with a dedicated cleaning cartridge. Most
drives have an indicator that lights up when cleaning is needed. The
cleaning procedure is usually very simple, and involves nothing more
than inserting the cleaning cartridge into the machine, which then
automatically starts the cleaning cycle. A single cleaning cartridge can
be used multiple (typically about 50) times. Although I was able to
purchase cleaning cartridges for both the DDS and the DLT-IV drives
online, it is unclear whether new cartridges are still manufactured
today. Since it is not easy or even recommended to clean these drives
manually (in fact this is likely to result in damage), the availability
of cleaning cartridges could be a concern for keeping older tape formats
like these accessible in the long run.

Software {#software}
========

Once the hardware is set up, a number of options are available for
reading the data from the tapes. Often, tapes contain backup archives
that were written by backup utilities such as *tar*, *cpio*, *dump* or
*NTBackup*, to name but a few. One approach would be to restore the
contents of each tape using the original software that was used to write
it. Even though many of these utilities are still available today
(especially the Unix-based ones), this approach is not a practical one.
First of all, it would require prior knowledge of the tape’s archive
format. Although we may sometimes have this knowledge (e.g., the writing
on a tape’s label may indicate it was created with the *tar* utility),
in practice we often simply don’t know how a tape was written at all.
Also, this approach would complicate things, because each format would
require its own custom workflow. Finally, it would not work with formats
for which the original software is not readily available on the forensic
workstation (e.g. the Microsoft Tape Format that was used by Windows
*NTBackup*).

A better approach is to use tools like *dd*[^18] which are able to read
data directly at the block device level. This way, tapes can be read in
a format-agnostic manner. The general idea here is that we use *dd* to
read all archive files on a tape, irrespective of their format. We then
use format identification tools such as *file(1)*[^19], *Apache
Tika*[^20], *Fido*[^21] or *Siegfried*[^22] to establish the format of
each archive file, and subsequently use dedicated, format-specific
utilities to extract their contents. This is similar to existing
forensic workflows that are used for other carrier types in e.g.
*BitCurator*.

Reading a tape with dd and mt {#reading-a-tape-with-dd-and-mt}
-----------------------------

In the simplest case, reading data from a tape involves nothing more
than a *dd* command line such as this one:

    dd if=/dev/nst0 of=file0001.dd bs=16384

Here, the “`if`” argument tells *dd* to read input from the non-rewind
block device `/dev/nst0`, and the value of “`of`” defines the file where
output is written. The “`bs`” argument defines a block size (here in
bytes), and this is where the first complication arises. The actual
value that must be used here depends on the software that was used to
write the tape, and its settings. If *dd* is invoked with a value that
is too small, it will fail with a “cannot allocate memory” error. After
some experimentation I was able to establish the block size using the
following iterative procedure:

1.  Starting with a block size of 512 bytes, try to read one single
    record (and direct the output to the null device, as we don’t need
    it):

         dd if=/dev/nst0 of=/dev/null bs=512 count=1

2.  Position the tape 1 record backward using the *mt*[^23] tool (this
    resets the read position to the start of the current session):

         mt -f /dev/nst0 bsr 1

3.  If step 1 raised an error in *dd*, increase the block size value by
    512 bytes, and repeat from step 1.

Repeating these steps until *dd* exits without errors will yield the
correct block size. Re-running the *dd* command at the start of this
section with this value will recover the first session on the tape to a
single output file. This leads to a second complication: a tape may
contain additional sessions. We can test for this by positioning the
tape 1 record forward with the *mt* tool:

    mt -f /dev/nst0 fsr 1

If the *mt* call doesn’t result in an error (i.e. *mt*’ s exit code
equals zero), at least one additional session exists. In that case we
use *mt* again to position the tape 1 record backward (the start of the
second session). We then repeat the block-estimation procedure for the
second session, and read the data with *dd*.

All of the above steps are repeated until *mt*’s `fsr` command results
in a non-zero exit code, which means no additional sessions exist. The
end result is that for each session on the tape we now have a
corresponding output file.

Tapeimgr {#tapeimgr}
--------

Even though the above procedure is not particularly complicated, having
to go through all these steps by hand would be very cumbersome.
Moreover, *dd*’s ability to overwrite entire block devices with one
single command introduces a high risk of accidental data loss (hence its
“destroy disk” nickname). Also, it would be useful to have a more
user-friendly method for reading data tapes. Because of these reasons, I
developed *tapeimgr*[^24], which is a software application that allows
one to read data tapes using a simple, easy-to-use graphical user
interface. Written in Python, it was loosely inspired by the popular
*Guymager* forensic imaging software[^25]. Internally, *tapeimgr* just
wraps around *dd* and *mt*, but it completely hides the complexities of
these tools from the user. The software runs on any Linux distribution,
and can be installed with *pip*, Python’s default package manager. Its
only dependencies are a recent version of *Python* (3.2 or more recent),
the *TkInter* package, and *dd* and *mt*. All of these are present by
default on most modern Linux distros.

Figure 5 shows *tapeimgr*’s interface.

<figure class="image">
  <img src="{{ BASE_PATH }}/images/2019/09/tapeimgr.png" alt="The tapeimgr interface">
  <figcaption>Figure 5: The tapeimgr interface</figcaption>
</figure>

At the very minimum, a user must select a
directory to which all output for a given tape is written. If necessary,
the read process can be further customized using a number of options
that are described in detail in the *tapeimgr* documentation. There are
also entry fields for descriptive metadata, and the values that are
entered here are written to a metadata file in JSON format. This file
also contains some basic event and technical metadata, including SHA-512
checksums of each session (which is represented as a file) that is read
from the tape. After the user presses the *Start* button, the progress
of the tape reading procedure can be monitored from a widget at the
bottom of the interface; the information displayed here is also written
to a log file. When *tapeimgr* has finished reading a tape, it displays
a prompt that tells the user whether the read process completed
successfully. In case of any problems, the log file contains detailed
information about all steps in the tape reading process. In addition to
the graphical user interface, *tapeimgr* also has a command-line
interface, which makes it possible to integrate it into other
applications.

Limitations of tapeimgr {#limitations-of-tapeimgr}
-----------------------

At this stage, *tapeimgr* has two important limitations. First, it only
supports tapes for which the block size is constant within each session.
More recent tape drives are often capable of writing tapes in “variable
block” mode, where the block size within a session varies. This is not
supported, although a possible (but so far untested) workaround may be
to set the Initial Block Size to some arbitrary large value that is
equal to or larger than the overall largest block size on the tape[^26].
Variations in block size *between* sessions are no problem, and are
fully supported. Also, *tapeimgr* is not able to recover data from tapes
that were partially overwritten. As an example, suppose that a tape
originally contained 3 sessions with a size of 200 MB each. If someone
later overwrote part of the first session with a 10 MB session at the
start of that tape, running the tape through *tapeimgr* will only
recover the first 10 MB session, and ignore the remaining sessions. The
reason for this is that each write action adds an “End Of Media” (EOM)
marker just beyond the end of the written data, and once an EOM is
written, any previously recorded data beyond that point are no longer
accessible (reportedly workarounds exist, but these are specific to
kernel drivers)[^27].

Reading the xxLINK tapes {#reading-the-xxlink-tapes}
========================

With all the hardware and software in place, I first experimented with
reading some unimportant, disposable DDS-1 and DLT-IV test tapes. Based
on these tests I designed processing workflows, which I then documented
by creating detailed descriptions that cover all steps that have to be
followed to read a tape[^28]. Once I was confident that the workflows
were sufficiently robust, I applied them to the *xxLINK* tapes. All but
one of the DDS-1 tapes could be read without problems. For one tape, the
recovery resulted in a 10-kB file with only null bytes, which most
likely means the tape is faulty. The two DDS-3 tapes could be read
successfully as well. Most of these tapes contained multiple (up to 4)
sessions. Of the 14 DLT-IV tapes, only 7 could be read without problems.
For the remaining 7, the reading procedure resulted in a zero-length
file, which means the tape drive interprets them as empty. A common
characteristic of all “failed” DLT-IV tapes is that they were written at
40 GB capacity, whereas the other tapes were written at 35 GB capacity.
This is odd, as our DLT-IV drive does in fact support 40 GB capacity
tapes (this was confirmed by writing some data to a blank test tape at
40 GB capacity, which could subsequently be read without problems).
Although the exact cause is unknown at this stage, it is possible that
these tapes are simply faulty, or perhaps they were erased or
overwritten at some point. Interestingly, the label on at least one of
the problematic tapes contains some writing that suggests it was already
faulty around the time it was written. Table 1 gives a
brief summary of the above results.

|                      | DDS-1 | DDS-3 | DLT-IV |
|:---------------------|:-----:|:-----:|:------:|
| \# tapes             |   17  |   2   |   14   |
| \# read successfully |   16  |   2   |    7   |

*Table 1: Summary of xxLINK tapes read results*


Extraction of recovered container files {#extraction-of-recovered-container-files}
=======================================

It is important to stress that the above *tapeimgr*-based workflow only
recovers the contents of the tapes at the bit level: for each session on
the tape it results in one bitstream (file). Additional steps are needed
to interpret the recovered bitstreams in a meaningful way. At the very
the minimum two additional steps are necessary. First we need to
identify the format of the container files that were recovered from the
tapes. Once the container format is known, we can (hopefully) find some
format-specific software that is capable of extracting the content of
the container files. For format identification I ran the Unix *file(1)*
command (v. 5.32)[^29] on all recovered files. The results are
summarized in Table 2.

| Format (file(1))                 | Number of files |
|:---------------------------------|:---------------:|
| new-fs dump file (big endian)    |        28       |
| new-fs dump file (little endian) |        8        |
| tar archive                      |        4        |
| POSIX tar archive                |        2        |
| POSIX tar archive (GNU)          |        5        |

*Table 2: Formats of recovered files according to file(1)*

Most files in the *xxLINK* data set are Unix *dump* archives[^30].
*Dump* is an old backup utility, and its archive files can be extracted
using the *restore* tool[^31]. Even though *dump* and *restore* are
largely obsolete today, the software is still available in the Debian
repositories, and as a result these tools can be easily installed on
most Linux-based platforms. A few words of caution: first, by default
*restore* extracts the contents of a *dump* file to the system’s root
directory, i.e. it tries to recover a full backup. For our purposes this
behaviour is clearly unwanted, and could even wreak havoc on the
forensic workstation’s file system. However, extraction to a
user-defined directory is possible by running *restore* in “interactive”
mode[^32]. A disadvantage of having to use the interactive mode is that
it makes bulk processing of *dump* files virtually impossible. This
could be a serious problem when one has to deal with very large numbers
of these files. Second, it is important to check the file system of the
disk to which the container file is extracted. I initially tried to
extract the *dump* files to an *NTFS*-formatted[^33] external hard disk.
However, it turned out that the names of some files and directories
inside the archive were not compatible with *NTFS*, and as a result
these files were not extracted. Since the *dump* archives were
originally created from a Unix-based file system, this is not
surprising. Also, any file attributes that are not supported by *NTFS*
(e.g. access permissions and ownership) are lost when extracting to
*NTFS*. Extraction to another disk that was formatted as *Ext4*[^34]
(which is the default file system for most Linux distributions) resolved
this issue.

The remaining files are all *tar* archives, a format that is still
widely used today. These files can be extracted by simply running the
*tar*[^35] command like this:

    tar -xvf /path/to/file0001.dd > /dev/null

The earlier observations on the file system of the disk to which the
container is extracted also apply to *tar* files.

Using *restore* and *tar* I was able to successfully extract the
contents of all container files. For a small number of *dump* files,
*restore* reported errors about missing files that could not be found.
Although the exact cause is unknown at this stage, a possible
explanation could be that in these cases a single *dump* was stored as
two volumes on separate physical tapes. This will need further
investigation. Nevertheless, overall the interpretation of the *xxLINK*
tapes at the container level is quite straightforward.

It is worth noting that the extraction may be more complicated for other
container formats. For example, a number of Microsoft backup tools for
the Windows platform (e.g. *NTBackup*) used to write data to tape using
the *Microsoft Tape Format*[^36]. This is a proprietary format that is
only officially supported by the original creator software, which is not
freely available, and only runs under Windows (however, a few
open-source tools exist that claim to support the format). As the
*xxLINK* data set does not include this format, it was not investigated
as part of this work.

Reconstruction of sites {#reconstruction-of-sites}
=======================

Once the contents of the container files are extracted, we can start
reconstructing the web sites. At this stage of the Web Archaeology
project we have only just made a start with this; however, it is
possible to present some first results. As a first step we need to
inspect the contents of the data that were extracted from the container
files, and identify any files and directories that contain web site
data. This includes not only any directories with the sites’ source
data, but also server configuration files, which contain valuable
information about the sites. For instance, from the configuration files
it is possible to see at which domains and URLs they were originally
hosted, and how internal forwards were handled. With this information it
is possible to host any of the old sites on a locally running web server
at their original domains. A detailed discussion of the technical
details is beyond the scope of this paper, but the general approach is
similar to the one we used earlier to reconstruct the *NL-Menu* web
index in 2018 [\[3\]](https://www.bitsgalore.org/2018/04/24/resurrecting-the-first-dutch-web-index-nl-menu-revisited),
[\[4\]](https://www.bitsgalore.org/2018/07/11/crawling-offline-web-content-the-nl-menu-case).
It comprises the following steps[^37]:

1.  Set up a web server (typically *Apache*)[^38], and restrict access
    to the server to *localhost* (this ensures that any hosted sites are
    only accessible locally on the machine on which the server is
    running).

2.  Copy the contents of the site (i.e. its directory tree) to the
    default root folder used by the web server (typically `/var/www`),
    and update the file permissions.

3.  Configure the site by creating a configuration file (or by adding an
    entry to an existing configuration file).

4.  Activate the configuration file.

5.  Add the site’s domain to the *hosts* file (`/etc/hosts`).

6.  Restart the web server.

After following these steps, the site is now locally accessible at its
original URL, and it can be viewed in a browser, or archived with web
crawler software such as *wget*. Since the directory structure of the
web site data on the *xxLINK* tapes is quite uniform, it was possible to
automate these steps to a large extent. Using this approach, I have so
far reconstructed about 20 sites from one of the 1995 DDS-1 tapes by
hosting them on an *Apache* web server instance. A few examples will
illustrate the diversity of the sites in the *xxLINK* data set. Figure
6 shows the home page of *xxLINK*’s web site.

<figure class="image">
  <img src="{{ BASE_PATH }}/images/2019/09/xxlink.png" alt="xxLINK home page">
  <figcaption>Figure 6: xxLINK home page</figcaption>
</figure>

Figure 7 shows a snapshot of the home page of the web site of Schiphol Airport, which
pre-dates the earliest snapshot of this site in Internet Archive[^39] by
several months.

<figure class="image">
  <img src="{{ BASE_PATH }}/images/2019/09/schiphol.png" alt="Home page of Schiphol Airport">
  <figcaption>Figure 7: Home page of Schiphol Airport</figcaption>
</figure>

Figure 8 shows a report on drugs policy in the Netherlands,
which was published as part of the site of the Dutch Ministry of Health,
Welfare and Sport. 

<figure class="image">
  <img src="{{ BASE_PATH }}/images/2019/09/vwsdrugs.png" alt="Report on Drugs policy in the Netherlands on web site of Dutch Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport">
  <figcaption>Figure 8: Report on Drugs policy in the Netherlands on web site of Dutch Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport</figcaption>
</figure>

Finally, Figure 9 shows a
contest published on the site of Dutch publisher Database Publications.
The objective of the contest was to correctly identify the web addresses
of the home pages shown in the image; free copies of *CorelDraw 5.0*
were available to five lucky winners.

<figure class="image">
  <img src="{{ BASE_PATH }}/images/2019/09/prijsvraag.png" alt="Home page identification contest on web site of Database Publications">
  <figcaption>Figure 9: Home page identification contest on web site of Database Publications</figcaption>
</figure>

The site reconstruction procedure will most likely need further
refinement. For instance, most of the sites on the 1995 tape are
relatively simple static HTML sites, but a few include forms that use
CGI scripts, which currently do not work. Also, it is possible that the
sites on the more recent (1999) tapes are more complex, but this needs
further investigation. Once the analysis and processing of the data from
the remaining tapes is complete, a more in-depth report on the
reconstruction procedure will be published separately.

Conclusions {#conclusions}
===========

In this paper I showed how old DDS and DLT-IV tapes from the ’90s can be
read on a modern desktop workstation running Linux (in this case the
Ubuntu-based *BitCurator* environment). I also explained how I created
workflows that allow one to recover data from these tapes in a
format-agnostic way, using the user-friendly *tapeimgr* software.
Finally I discussed how I then extracted the contents of the resulting
files, and how I used this to reconstruct a number of “lost” web sites
from 1995. The workflow descriptions are available on Github[^40], and
they will most likely evolve further over time. They are published under
a permissive license that allows anyone to adapt them and create
derivatives. They describe all aspects of the tape reading process in
detail, including the hardware components used and their
characteristics, links to relevant documentation, instructions on how to
handle the tapes (e.g. how to write-protect them), how to operate the
tape readers, and how to use them in conjunction with *tapeimgr*. The
level of detail provided should be sufficient to allow others to
reproduce these workflows, and adapt them to their needs if necessary.
Since the process of reading data tapes on Linux-based systems is quite
standardized, other tape formats that are not covered by this paper can
probably be processed in a similar way.

Acknowledgments {#acknowledgments}
===============

First of all thanks are due to Wendy van Dijk and Elizabeth Mattijsen
for making the *xxLINK* tapes available to us, and to Kees Teszelszky,
Peter de Bode and Jasper Faase for initiating the Web Archaeology
project, and establishing the contact with *xxLINK*. Peter Boel and René
van Egdom are thanked for their help digging out the tape drives and
other obscure hardware peripherals, and Willem Jan Faber for various
helpful hardware-related suggestions. Finally, thanks are due to the
anonymous reviewers who provided valuable feedback to an earlier draft
of this paper.


References {#references}
===============

\[1\]  B. Sierman and K. Teszelszky, "How can we improve our web
    collection? an evaluation of webarchiving at the KB National
    Library of the Netherlands (2007-2017)," *Alexandria: The Journal
    of National and International Library and Information
    Issues*, Aug. 2017. DOI: 10.1177/0955749017725930. \[Online\]. Available: <https://doi.org/10.1177/0955749017725930>.

\[2\]  S. Ross and A. Gow, "Digital archaeology: Rescuing neglected and
    damaged data resources. a jisc/npo study within the electronic
    libraries (elib) programme on the preservation of electronic materials.," University of Glasgow, 1999. \[Online\]. 
    Available: <http://www.ukoln.ac.uk/services/elib/papers/supporting/pdf/p2.pdf>.

\[3\]  J. van der Knijff, *Resurrecting the first Dutch web
    index: NL-menu revisited*, 2018. \[Online\]. Available: <https://www.bitsgalore.org/2018/04/24/resurrecting-the-first-dutch-web-index-nl-menu-revisited>.

\[4\]  ------, *Crawling offline web content: The NL-menu
    case*, 2018. \[Online\]. Available: <https://www.bitsgalore.org/2018/07/11/crawling-offline-web-content-the-nl-menu-case>.

\[5\]  D. Elford, N. Del Pozo, S. Mihajlovic, D. Pearson, G. Clifton,
    and C. Webb, "Media matters: Developing processes for preserving
    digital objects on physical carriers at the national library of
    Australia," in *Proceedings, 74th IFLA General
    Conference and Council*, 2008. \[Online\].
    Available: <http://archive.ifla.org/IV/ifla74/papers/084-Webb-en.pdf>.

\[6\]  K. Woods and G. Brown, "From imaging to access - effective
    preservation of legacy removable media," in *Proceedings, Archiving
    2009*, 2009. \[Online\]. Available: <https://kamwoods.net/publications/woodsbrownarch09.pdf>.

\[7\]  K. Woods, C. Lee, and S. Garfinkel, "Extending digital repository
    architectures to support disk image preservation and access," in
    *Proceedings of the 11th Annual International ACM/IEEE Joint Conference on Digital Libraries*,
    ser. JCDL '11, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada: ACM, 2011, pp. 57-66,
    ISBN: 978-1-4503- 0744-4. DOI: 10.1145/1998076.1998088. \[Online\].
    Available: <http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1998076.1998088>.

\[8\]  C. Lee, M. Kirschenbaum, A. Chassanoff, P. Olsen, and K. Woods,
    "BitCurator: Tools and techniques for digital forensics in
    collecting institutions," *D-Lib Magazine*, vol. 18, 5/6 2012.
    \[Online\]. Available: <http://www.dlib.org/dlib/may12/lee/05lee.html>.

\[9\]  J. John, "Digital forensics and preservation," Digital
    Preservation Coalition, 2012. \[Online\].
    Available: <http://dx.doi.org/10.7207/twr12-03>.

\[10\] M. Pennock, P. May, M. Day, K. Davies, S. Whibley, A. Kimura, and E.
    Halvarsson, "The flashback project: Rescuing disk-based content from
    the 1980's to the current day," in *Proceedings, 11th
    Digital Curation Conference*, 2016. \[Online\]. Available:
    <https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1321629>.

\[11\] A. Prael and A. Wickner, "Getting to know FRED: Introducing
    workflows for born-digital content," *Practical Technology for
    Archives*, vol. 4, 2015. \[Online\]. Available: <https://practicaltechnologyforarchives.org/issue4_prael_wickner/>.

\[12\] D. Salo, *Building audio, video and data-rescue kits*, 2017.
    \[Online\]. Available: <https://radd.dsalo.info/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/BuildDocumentation.pdf>.

\[13\] BitCurator Consortium, *Workflows*. \[Online\].
    Available: <https://bitcuratorconsortium.org/workflows>.

\[14\] T. De Haan, "Project the digital city revives, a case study of web
    archaeology," *Proceedings of the 13th
    International Conference on Digital Preservation*, 2016.
    \[Online\]. Available: <https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1255965>.

\[15\] T. De Haan, R. Jansma, and P. Vogel, *Do it yourself handboek voor
    webarcheologie*, 2017. \[Online\]. Available:
    <https://hart.amsterdam/image/2017/11/17/20171116_freeze_diy_handboek.pdf>.


[^1]: Elizabeth Mattijsen, old xxLINK-homepage:
    <https://liz.nl/xxlink-homepage.htm>

[^2]: See e.g. the links in the “Tapes” section at
    <https://github.com/KBNLresearch/forensicImagingResources/blob/master/doc/df-resources.md>

[^3]: BitCurator: <https://bitcurator.net/>

[^4]: “Digital Data Storage”, Wikipedia:
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_Data_Storage>

[^5]: “HP StorageWorks DDS/DAT Media - DDS/DAT Media Compatibility
    Matrix”, Hewlett Packard:
    <https://support.hpe.com/hpsc/doc/public/display?docId=emr_na-lpg50457>

[^6]: “Digital Linear Tape”, Wikipedia:
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_Linear_Tape>

[^7]: “DLT Drive Media and Cleaning Tape Compatibility Guide”,
    TapeandMedia.com:
    <https://www.tapeandmedia.com/dlt_capacity_info.asp>

[^8]: “Parallel SCSI”, Wikipedia:
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parallel_SCSI>

[^9]: “Conventional PCI”, Wikipedia:
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conventional_PCI>

[^10]: “PCI Express”, Wikipedia:
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PCI_Express>

[^11]: “Adaptec Support”, Microsemi:
    <https://storage.microsemi.com/en-us/support/scsi/>

[^12]: “Parallel SCSI”, Wikipedia:
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parallel_SCSI>

[^13]: “LVD, SE, HVD, SCSI Compatibility - Or Not”, Paralan:
    <http://www.paralan.com/scsiexpert.html>

[^14]: “SCSI connector”, Wikipedia:
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SCSI_connector>

[^15]: “What kind of SCSI do I have?”, Paralan:
    <http://www.paralan.com/sediff.html>

[^16]: “Parallel SCSI”, Wikipedia:
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parallel_SCSI>

[^17]: “SCSI termination Q&A”, Adaptec:
    <https://storage.microsemi.com/en-us/support/scsi/3940/aha-3940uwd/hw_install/scsi_termination.htm>

[^18]: “dd (Unix)”, Wikipedia:
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dd_%28Unix%29>

[^19]: “file (command)”, Wikipedia:
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File_(command)>

[^20]: Apache Tika: <https://tika.apache.org/>

[^21]: Fido: <http://fido.openpreservation.org/>

[^22]: Siegfried: <https://www.itforarchivists.com/siegfried/>

[^23]: “mt(1) - Linux man page”, die.net:
    <https://linux.die.net/man/1/mt>

[^24]: “Tapeimgr”: <https://github.com/KBNLresearch/tapeimgr>

[^25]: “Guymager homepage”: <https://guymager.sourceforge.io/>

[^26]: “ “Cannot allocate memory” when reading from SCSI tape”, Unix
    Stack Exchange: <https://unix.stackexchange.com/a/366217>

[^27]: “Tape Driver Semantics”, Amanda Wiki:
    <https://wiki.zmanda.com/index.php/Tape_Driver_Semantics>

[^28]: “KB Forensic Imaging Resources”:
    <https://github.com/KBNLresearch/forensicImagingResources/tree/master/doc>

[^29]: “file (command)”, Wikipedia:
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File_(command)>

[^30]: “Unix dump”, ArchiveTeam File Formats Wiki:
    <http://fileformats.archiveteam.org/wiki/Unix_dump>

[^31]: “restore(8) - Linux man page”,
    die.net: <https://linux.die.net/man/8/restore>

[^32]: A step-by-step description can be found here:
    <https://github.com/KBNLresearch/forensicImagingResources/blob/master/doc/extract-dumpfile.md>

[^33]: “NTFS”, Wikipedia: <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NTFS>

[^34]: “Ext4”, Wikipedia: <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ext4>

[^35]: “tar(1) - Linux man page”,
    die.net: <https://linux.die.net/man/1/tar>

[^36]: Microsoft Tape Format Specification Version 1.00a:
    <http://laytongraphics.com/mtf/MTF_100a.PDF>

[^37]: These steps are described in more detail here:
    <https://github.com/KBNLresearch/nl-menu-resources/blob/master/doc/serving-static-website-with-Apache.md>

[^38]: The Apache HTTP Server Project: <https://httpd.apache.org/>

[^39]: Link: <https://web.archive.org/web/19961018155616/http://www.schiphol.nl/>

[^40]: “KB Forensic Imaging Resources”:
    <https://github.com/KBNLresearch/forensicImagingResources/tree/master/doc>

<hr>
Originally published in [Proceedings of the 16th
International Conference on Digital Preservation, 2019](add-link-here)
